Active reconnaissance requires you to make some kind of contact with your target. This contact can be a phone call or a visit to the target company under some pretence to gather more information, usually as part of social engineering. Alternatively, it can be a direct connection to the target system, whether visiting their website or checking if their firewall has an SSH port open. Think of it like you are closely inspecting windows and door locks. Hence, it is essential to remember not to engage in active reconnaissance work before getting signed legal authorization from the client.


In this room, we focus on active reconnaissance. Active reconnaissance begins with direct connections made to the target machine. Any such connection might leave information in the logs showing the client IP address, time of the connection, and duration of the connection, among other things. However, not all connections are suspicious. It is possible to let your active reconnaissance appear as regular client activity. Consider web browsing; no one would suspect a browser connected to a target web server among hundreds of other legitimate users. You can use such techniques to your advantage when working as part of the red team (attackers) and don’t want to alarm the blue team (defenders).

In this room, we go through various tools commonly bundled with most operating systems or easily obtainable. We begin with the web browser and its built-in developer tools; furthermore, we show you how a web browser can be “armed” to become an efficient reconnaissance framework. Afterwards, we discuss other benign tools such as ping, traceroute, and telnet. All these programs require connection to the target, and hence our activities would fall under active reconnaissance.